If your professed goal is not a deal,
but killing their leadership and
replacing their regime,
why aren't they going to go apocalyptic?
Again, that's not
>> I I just struggle I just struggle with
this with this
calculus.
>> Ross, that's my ultimate goal. It And
there's a difference It may not sound
like there is, but there's a difference
between me and President Trump.
So,
is the United States winning its war
against Iran? We've won this This war
has been won. We're winning
decisively
and on our terms. And if this is what
success looks like,
>> gas prices surging, airlines hiking
their ticket prices,
>> the S&P 500 down 5% since New Year's,
what would failure look like? Iran, what
they have shown is that they are able to
kind of hold the global economy hostage.
>> If the Iranian regime stays in power,
they win. My guest this week is the CEO
of the Foundation for Defense of
Democracies. We got to go in and we got
to destroy this missile program and we
want to make sure that they can never
threaten the American homeland. He's a
long-time Iran hawk who argues that
victory and regime change are both
potentially within reach. Mark Dubowitz,
welcome to Interesting Times. Ross,
thanks for having me. Honored to be
here. So, we're talking, I'd say about
24 hours or a little more after
President Trump postponed his professed
plan to strike Iran's power plants if
they did not reopen the Strait of
Hormuz.
And we're also talking in the background
of conflicting reports about possible
talks between the United States and the
Iranian government or elements of the
Iranian government. All of that seems
very vague and nebulous at the moment.
But that's roughly where we are in the
timeline right now. So,
given where we are, first question, very
easy one, is the United States winning
its war against the Islamic Republic of
Iran?
Well, short answer is yes.
Longer answer is
depends on what you mean by winning.
And if you mean based on what President
Trump laid out as the objectives of the
United States,
then we are winning. And And those
objectives, he was very clear, it's
essentially to destroy the war-making
capabilities of the Islamic Republic,
which includes its missile program, its
navy, and its nuclear capabilities. And
I think with that in mind, it's only
been 3 weeks in,
think the US military, along with the
Israelis, have done a pretty
extraordinary job of severely degrading
those capabilities across all
lines of of power projection. I mean,
the missile program has been severely
degraded. Ross, give you a sense, I
mean, they had the largest missile
inventory in the Middle East before the
war started.
Um they were able to produce about 100
new ballistic missiles every month.
Their ballistic missile production rate
is now zero.
And their launchers have been reduced by
2/3. The Iranian navy has been
decimated.
The nuclear program, I think, is still
to be determined.
But between the 12-day war last year and
Israeli strikes against nuclear
facilities during the past 3 weeks, the
program has been set back even
more severely. But there's still the
Battle of Hormuz to be won or lost, and
I think that's going to be a decisive
battle that will determine whether
President Trump can
legitimately claim, at the end of all of
this, a major military success.
Yeah, well, we'll we'll talk about the
Battle of Hormuz. Um let's just stay
with military degradation for a moment.
In a scenario where
this conflict ended soon,
and those objectives were seen to have
been met. There's no world where
you're going to eliminate completely the
Iranian regime's capacity to have a
military unless you invade Iran and
occupy it and so on. So, does that mean
that
this military operation in its limited
form is just about buying time
so that we just don't have to attack
Iran again for 5 years or something like
that?
Yeah, I mean I think what we're trying
to do is severely degrade their
war-making capability um
and also their repression apparatus.
That's actually been the Israeli piece
of the military operation. But, I think
over the past 3 weeks we have now gotten
enough evidence from Trump himself and
from the White House that they're very
much setting these objectives as
missile, navy, nuclear. So, it depends
on the extent to which Iran can
reconstitute its navy, its missile
capabilities, and its nuclear
capabilities. It's difficult to know
exactly how far we set it back, and I
think one should always be careful about
those kinds of estimates. And we also
should remember that even if a US
president is not prepared to bomb again,
as long as the US president doesn't
block the Israelis from striking again,
if they just keep coming back and as
they call mowing the grass, you can keep
setting back those capabilities and
degrading them over and over again. So,
now let's talk about the regime cuz you
you already
gestured at this by mentioning Israeli
attempts to degrade the regime's
capacities. Um a week ago you co-wrote
an essay for the Atlantic entitled
Glimpsing Victory in Iran.
I think it's fair to say that you have a
broader definition of what victory looks
like than the military objectives laid
out by the Trump administration. So,
tell me what your vision of victory in
the war is.
Well, I think as we wrote in the piece,
you know, our vision of total victory is
the end of the regime in Iran. And I've,
you know, that's been my long-standing
position for now 20 years I've been
working on this issue
cuz I believe that to
permanently solve this problem
you have to replace the regime in Iran.
And I've been a a long-standing
supporter of
boots on the ground to do that, but
Iranian boots on the ground, not
American boots on the ground, which I
really believe that across
broad swaths of Iranian society that the
the level of enmity for this regime
amongst Iranians is deep and profound
and has gotten even more deep deeper and
more profound since January of this year
when the Iranian regime killed Iranians
on January 8th and 9th
um in the face of a huge protest
movement. So I I've long believed that
providing maximum pressure on the regime
maximum support for the Iranian people
and using a variety of uh overt and
covert means to fracture fracture the
regime's support base will ultimately
lead to the end of this regime. That's
total victory. Right.
>> That's what I would define it. And that
in in in that essay and elsewhere you've
talked about what you've described as a
kind of three-phase
process
of getting there
from where we are now, where the first
phase is the kind of military campaign
that the US
has embarked on, degradation of the
Iranian military,
um
just talk through briefly
what you think each phase would look
like, again in an in a best-case
scenario that ends in regime change.
Yeah, so phase one is major military
operations that are ongoing right now.
Remember it's worth reme- reminding
ourselves we're 3 weeks in.
Uh you know, the Islamic Republic of
Iran has been at war with America for 47
years and we've been fighting back
against them for 3 weeks. So in the span
of 3 weeks I think that there's been
some extraordinary military
accomplishments, much more to do as we
talked about. Um I could see this
campaign lasting for another 3 weeks. I
think it would be a big mistake to pull
the plug right now. But I it also be a
mistake to continue this war for, you
know, for months. Right.
>> In phase one. In phase two, Phase two.
Yeah, phase two is very much what the
Israelis already embarking on right now,
which is severely degrading the
repression apparatus of the regime,
right? That they they began that on
February 28th with that initial strike
that took out the former supreme leader
Ali Khamenei and his top IRGC
commanders, generals, and advisers. And
they have been systematically,
methodically, patiently taking out the
repression apparatus day by day. And
this is the IRGC, the Basij, um the
police forces,
the intelligence services, the people
that are responsible for crushing
Iranian opposition and did so in
January. They have been eliminating
those people. I would see that from a
military point of view continuing in
sequence with phase one. When major
military operations are over,
that the strikes on the
>> You're still going to have You're still
going to have essentially decapitation
strikes against a wide range of
Iranian military and political leaders.
Yeah, now it depends on what happens on
the negotiations, which I'm sure we're
going to talk about. If there is some
deal
where Trump has now negotiated an
agreement with this regime,
there's an open question about whether
Trump would then greenlight continued
Israeli
military strikes, air strikes on the
regime.
Or would he say, "Okay, those strikes
are over." But then greenlight the
Israelis to continue to do what they
would do covertly. And then phase three
is really what I call this maximum
support campaign, where you're actually
providing serious support to the
opposition so that the next time they
come to the streets, and they're are to
the streets again, but this time unlike
in January, you have changed the
equation. You've strengthened the
opposition, so it's not defenseless in
the in the face of that repression
apparatus as it was in January, and
you've given Iranians perhaps a fighting
chance to
to take back their country as President
Trump said, once in a generation
opportunity.
Okay.
I think that's a good overview. Let's go
back to where we are now
in phase one.
Um
there's no question, as you've said,
that we have degraded Iran's military.
However,
it's also clear that at the moment the
Iranians are still quite capable of
firing missiles and rockets at their
neighbors,
menacing the infrastructure that the
entire Persian Gulf depends upon,
meaning not just oil and gas, but
desalinization plants and power plants.
The number of missiles fired has gone
way down, but it hasn't dropped to zero.
And then,
more importantly, the Iranians have
essentially closed the Strait of Hormuz,
throwing global energy markets into
turmoil.
What do we do about that?
Yeah, I So, before before answering the
question about what we do about it, I I
just want to touch upon something that I
think is lost in the current debate,
right? Because I think we we all are
moving so quickly, things are changing
so quickly, it's worth a little bit of
sort of historical perspective on this.
And that is that
if you could imagine today's regime not
severely degraded militarily, not having
lost its missile launchers and ballistic
missile production capability, and had
its nuclear program severely degraded,
and lost its navy. Imagine this regime
even under the Obama nuclear deal, a
regime that had would pocket a trillion
dollars in the lifespan of that
agreement.
A regime that starting this year, the
restrictions on the nuclear program
would begin to sunset, Iran would emerge
with an industrial-size nuclear program.
So, imagine this regime with
nuclear-armed ICBMs, tens of thousands
of missiles, a trillion dollars, its
proxies still intact, Hezbollah, Hamas,
the Houthis, Shiite militias, this
regime threatening the Strait of Hormuz,
threatening the Gulf allies, threatening
US bases, US embassies, Israel and the
US homeland.
>> I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I
>> I I don't want to get too deep into the
deeper justifications for war yet, but I
I just want to say we're not on we're
not in the Obama timeline, we're in a
timeline
where the US and Israel successfully
delivered some significant blows to
Iranian power. And now we've decided to
deliver another more profound one, and
it is that blow that has yielded the
Iranian closure of the straits.
Right? So, that's that's where we are
now. So, it's not that the
counterfactual is important, but so is
the reality that we delivered a set of
blows successfully, we chose to go
further, that has activated a really
substantial Iranian response that
threatens global energy markets, the
global economy, and just sort of the
core economic and civilizational
functioning of the Persian Gulf. And so,
with that said, what do we do about it?
Yeah, I I I make the point Ross only to
say that it was inevitable that the
Islamic Republic was going to close the
Strait of Hormuz. And the only question
was were they going to close it with
nuclear weapons, ICBMs, a massive
missile inventory, terror proxies that
were intact and growing and becoming
more deadly, and a trillion dollars in
order to fortify their economy and fund
their nefarious attack activities, or
were they going to close it as they have
when they've been severely degraded
along all of those lines that you said?
So, the battle for Hormuz was a battle
that was inevitable, and the only
question was were we going to fight it
in a in a way where we were stronger and
they were weaker, or they were stronger
and we had very limited options in order
to open the strait. But, why was it
inevitable if we were able to, again,
substantially degrade both their terror
proxy networks and their nuclear
program? Iran was not going to close the
Strait of Hormuz 6 months ago. It didn't
close the Strait of Hormuz in response
to our bombing of Fordow, right? It only
closed the strait when we went all in.
And more than going all in on on
military
elements, when we went all in
in targeting regime leadership. And I
I'm just going to use the US and Israel
interchangeably here for this campaign
because I think that that that that is
accurate to what is practically going
on. In a world where we didn't target
the Iranian regime leadership, where we
didn't attempt to force regime change,
where we just carried out periodic
bombings of their military and so on,
it's not clear to me that you can say
definitely, "Oh, well, of course,
eventually Iran would have closed the
straits." We They closed the strait in
response to our attempt at regime
change. Isn't that fair?
No, I think that the Iranian strategy,
which would And by the way, this was
always the smart strategy for Khamenei,
and he'd still be alive to execute the
strategy if he had done this, which is
I'm going to reconstitute. So, after the
12-day war, I'm going to reconstitute my
missile program and on my nuclear
program. And it was only 12 days, and it
wasn't obliterated despite what
President Trump said. I'm just going to
work with the Chinese. The Chinese are
going to send in more sophisticated
Chinese air defenses. I'm going to
rebuild my terror proxies, and I'm going
to wait President Trump out. And in
January 2029, Trump's not going to be in
office. And it's a pretty good guess
who's ever president at that time,
unless it's perhaps Marco Rubio, but on
the Republican side and on the
Democratic side, you're not going to
find a president willing to confront
Iran militarily. So, at that point, I'm
home free.
And I would have if I were Khamenei, I
would have done a deal with Trump, a 2
and 1/2 year deal. I would have gotten
hundreds of billions of dollars in
sanctions relief, and Trump said make
Iran great again, and I would pocket all
that money. I would have reconstituted
slowly, and then once Trump was gone,
I'd be off to the races, and I would
rebuild all those capabilities that I
described earlier. And then I'd be
guessing I'd be guessing, but it's a
pretty good calculation that there's no
way a President Newsom or AOC or Vance
is going to support an Israeli strike
on Iran's nuclear and missile program.
And at that point, I'm in a position I
now control Hormuz.
I don't have to launch one drone, one
rocket, or one missile. I just have the
mere threat of using all those deadly
capabilities, and I have now deterred
the United States. I now own the Gulf. I
have a stranglehold over the world's
energy, and now I become a uh a a
superpower. That That is the Iranian
trajectory. That's where we're heading.
So, essentially, what has happened is,
in your view,
Donald Trump was the only American
president
capable of confronting Iran in any
meaningful way, allowing Israel to
confront its proxies. And so, in fact,
it is that we have chosen to fight an
inevitable battle of Hormuz now
because we don't trust our own political
system to restrain Iran without an epic
battle right now.
We have chosen this because we saw the
Iranians moving towards the end state
that I described. Mhm. The To prevent
them from moving to that end state, we
would have to fight a major war. Well,
we would But again, I I don't think, by
your own account, we would have to fight
a major war. We would just need the next
president to continue giving Israel
permission to degrade Hamas and
Hezbollah and continue to do periodic
strikes. And you're saying you don't
think any president would have extended
even that permission. I'm doubtful any
president would have extended that
permission, but that permission is not
enough because the Israelis don't have
the capabilities to destroy deeply
buried missile cities. They don't have
massive ordnance penetrators. They don't
have strategic bombers. They don't have
Tomahawk missiles. They don't have the
capabilities that we have to do severe
damage to Iran's missile capabilities.
So we So so it's right, it's not enough
for
a future US president to
allow Israel to conduct these raids. We
also have to be involved in them. And
that's that's fair.
But it again, it just seems to me that
the evidence of the last few years is
that you can do a lot of damage to Iran
without having a full-scale Battle of
the Hormuz Straits. But I I'm I don't
want to harp on this. Let's get back to
the war itself. So we're here and we're
going to fight the Battle of Hormuz. Do
we use ground troops?
Well, by the way, it's it's not
inevitable that we're going to fight the
Battle of Hormuz. I mean, we we saw
President Trump now do a 90° U-turn and
start to talk about negotiations. He
actually had a comment which I found
really disturbing. He said something to
the effect of, "Well, you know, maybe
the United States and the Ayatollah, we
just share the we we share the Gulf. We
share Hormuz." Yeah, he
he likes he likes to talk like that.
Yeah, now I don't know if he's serious
and he's just doing his usual Trumpian
faint.
Um, but that's obviously something that
would would terrify our Gulf Arab
neighbors. Um, and certainly should
terrify
the Japanese, the South Koreans, the
Indians, our European allies, anyone who
depends on Middle Eastern oil and
natural gas. The notion that Trump would
do a deal where we're going to share
Hormuz with the Iranians, with the
Ayatollah,
um, I think should should be should be
terrifying because if that is the case,
and again, I just want to get back to
this cuz I think it's worth harping on.
If Trump is gone in 2 and 1/2 years, and
the next president is not willing to
confront the Iranians, and the Israelis
don't have the capabilities to do enough
damage to their war-making capabilities,
then Iran ends up not we don't end up
sharing the Strait of Hormuz with Iran.
They end up owning it, and they end up
owning it because they've created
deterrence
because we don't have the ability to
confront them when they have nuclear
weapons capability, ICBMs, tens of
thousands of missiles, a large navy, and
a dominant position in the Gulf, right?
We had to fight that war.
>> Well, wait wait a minute. I mean,
they're not going to reconstitute that
in 2 years if the military campaign has
been as successful as you've suggested,
right? Not in two. Not in two.
>> In two, right. Oh, but over over a
longer time horizon. Over six. Over
eight. I mean, I'm talking about the
first two terms of of President, you
know, AOC.
>> yeah. Okay, but in a world where Trump
stays the course,
and we do
essentially try and find a military
solution
to the Straits of Hormuz. Does Does that
involve ground troops?
Well, it Trump hasn't excluded that, um,
and depends on what it means by doesn't
involve ground troops. I mean, I think
>> Well, well, to to me as a, you know,
extremely amateur student of military
matters at the moment, it seems very,
very difficult to render the straits
safe for passage as long as the Iranian
regime exercises full control the
literal physical territory on their side
of the straits. And so, if that's the
case, could be wrong, but if that's the
case, then
seems like to open the straits you have
to seize that territory. Does Does that
seem like something that could happen? I
don't want to get into details on a on a
public podcast, but I would just say
that there are other ways to control the
three key provinces
that are important to the to the strait
and are also critical to Iran's
energy industry.
Right? There's There's lots of ways in
which you can not even through military
means, but through
financial warfare and cyber
where you could do severe damage to
Iran's ability to control its own energy
industry, pay its own workers, and and
and have effective control over that
territory. Why haven't we done that yet?
Well, again, it's week three, Ross. It
You know, there's There's a lot ahead of
us and there's a lot of things we can do
besides dropping bombs or sending in the
Marines, right? Which is not to suggest
that that Trump may not do that, but I
think there's just a lot of ways we can
take away Iran's control of its energy
industry
and essentially strangle it
economically. Everybody's talked about
Kharg Island,
seizing Kharg. Obviously, Kharg's an
important part of this energy industry.
You know, 95% of oil exports go through
Kharg. It's 50% of the state budget.
It's $78 million a year. It represents 3
years of budget for the IRGC, the
Ministry of Intelligence, the security
apparatus, and the proxies. So, even if
you like block Kharg, now that could be
through Marines or the US Navy
quarantining it.
That But that is just actually one piece
of an overall strategy where you
literally could take away Iran's entire
energy industry.
Uh and you don't need to do it
necessarily with Marines. You can do it
with some innovative
financial warfare tools, which I'm not
going to get into on an open podcast.
>> That's That's That's fine. Okay, yeah.
What do you make of Iran's capacity to
do something apocalyptic
to its neighbors using whatever kind of
missiles and rockets remain to it? Cuz
this is,
you know, part of what's been going on.
The president has sort of threatened
various forms of escalation, and then
there have been sort of exchanges of
fire that have,
you know, involved natural gas,
desalinization, different things, and
then there's been a kind of walk-back
and a sense, at least
to some observers, that Iran is willing
to sort of go further up that escalatory
ladder
than we are. Do you think that that's a
danger where Iran, where it's not just
Hormuz, but it's Iran sort of saying,
the regime saying, "If we're going down,
no one's going to be able to drink fresh
water
in the Gulf for the next 6 months," or
something like that? Yeah, I mean,
again, I think it's important to say,
number one, I don't I don't think it's
President Trump's objective to bring the
regime down. I mean, he's made it very
clear is, you know, he wants to do a
deal, and we can talk about what the
elements of that deal should look like.
But, you're right. I mean, I think in an
apocalyptic situation, yes, the Iranians
will strike, and with whatever
capabilities they have left that haven't
been destroyed by the United States and
Israel, they will fire whatever they
have left at the Saudis, the Emiratis,
the Bahrainis. They'll go after
pipelines, salination plants, electrical
grids,
um try to wipe out all the energy
infrastructure. They'll have the will to
do that. There'll be an open question
about whether they'll have the
capabilities. And that was what to my
point earlier about will and capability,
right? The fact that we would ever let
Iran have both the will and the
capability to do that would be very,
very dangerous. They now have the will,
but they don't necessarily have the
capabilities. But but but again, they
have the will right now because whether
or not Trump himself is fully committed
to regime change, we, in collaboration
with the Israelis, have embarked on a
policy of
killing their leaders, right? Like,
that's where the will comes from. If you
existentially threaten the regime, you
do give them more reasons to go higher
on the escalation ladder. Not that they
would never have escalated before, not
that they weren't interested in
destroying Israel or being America's
enemies before, but things like what we
were just talking about, the sort of
attempted like a total destruction of
the functional architecture of
civilization around the Persian Gulf,
right? That's something that is more
plausible to them today because we, the
Israelis, however you want to cut it,
have, you know, been killing their
leadership, right? That That's just
Surely that just obviously changes their
escalation calculus. Like as a just as
just as a inevitable matter. And then
it's And then we have to figure out what
to do about it. Well, my point is that
they they have been escalating against
us and against Israel and against their
neighbors for decades. They You're
right, they continue to go up the
escalation curve as they prepare to take
more and more risk against us. It's It's
often with the Iranians that they back
down when they believe that the United
States of America is committed to taking
down their regime. Now, that was under
Khamenei. That was always his calculus
cuz he always understood that the only
country in the world was not Israel. It
was the United States who could bring
down his regime. And I could give you
lots of examples how Khamenei made that
decision to back down when the United
States of America even sent a hint that
they're willing to take down his regime.
But I think the
the current leadership and I and and I
think Qalibaf is the kind of man who
understands that after losing Khamenei
and losing Larijani and losing many of
his closest commanders and friends and
colleagues for over many, many years has
a choice. He has a fundamental choice
with President Trump. And the choice is
either to do a deal
and end this
or the United States of America is going
to adopt the Israeli strategy of regime
change. When America intervenes and
adopts that strategy, we will bring down
that regime. And I think for that reason
they have to be very careful about going
way up the escalation curve. By the way,
as they go up the escalation curve, not
only are we and the Israelis going up
it, but so are the Saudis and the
Emirates. They have to be thinking after
this war is over,
you know, did they go so far up the
escalation curve that they risk regime
change? They also risk ending up in a
permanent state of hostilities with
their Gulf Arab allies, and that is not
a position this regime wants to end up
in going forward. Okay. But But
meanwhile, we
there are some risks to the United
States as well
here, right? There are risks associated
with
Strait of Hormuz closed, and there are
risks involved in,
you know, again, I know you're not
explicitly calling for this, but sending
in ground troops and getting involved in
a ground war in Iran, right? So,
all all of those risks from
a let's just say from a domestic
American political perspective seem
incredibly substantial, and they all, to
me, seem like reasons why
I completely expect the president to
want to cut a deal. It isn't a deal here
just
absolutely the Trumpian thing to do?
Absolutely. Absolutely. And again, I
mean, I I I've I've said one, all the
risks that you outlined are risks I
acknowledge. Those are risks that I
would also put up against the risks of
inaction. My view is the risks of not
doing something were much greater than
risk of doing something. However, the
risks that you've outlined are
substantial,
and I completely agree with you that
Trump wants a deal. By the way, Trump
has wanted a deal since his first term
with the Iranians. Trump always wants a
deal. I agree that that's probably where
we're heading. If the Iranians are
smart, they'll take a deal, and if they
do, then I think we move to phase two
and phase three of what I described
earlier. And I think phase two and phase
three of maximum pressure on the regime,
maximum support for the Iranian people,
and continued fracturing of the support
base is something that can be done
the Israelis can lead with American
support, and
much of it, not all of it, can be done
not from the air by dropping bombs, but
by through other instruments of of
American and Israeli power, which I'm
happy that we you and I can talk about.
I think that is the strategy
>> would but why would why would Iran make
a deal
at a moment when again, they have closed
the straits,
the global economy is beginning to freak
out, and again, their own leadership
class is being killed. Why would they
make a deal where you say, "Okay, we're
going to open the straits, stop bombing
us, and what we're just going to accept
that there's going to be this ongoing
campaign of constant assassination and
destabilization?" I I think they keep
the straits closed and invite us to send
in the Marines.
Again, because I think if your professed
goal is not a deal, but
killing their leadership and replacing
their regime,
why aren't they going to go apocalyptic?
Again, that's my I just I I just
struggle I just struggle with this with
this
calculus.
>> my That's my ultimate goal. And there's
a difference may not sound like there
is, but there's a difference between me
and President Trump. No, I know No, I I
know I know there is. Yeah. I know. But
see, it seems to me
that again, by allying with Israel in a
campaign of decapitation, we have
already committed to regime change.
That's what we've done. What would be
different about a world where
Iran keeps the straits closed and Trump
says, "All right, that's it. Now we're
going for full regime change." Okay,
what what would we do? What would the US
be doing differently? Well, the first
thing is we two would be bombing
uh the regime.
Not just taking out its military
capabilities, we two would be doing
that, would be joining Israel in that.
We would be committing to do that over a
a sustained period of time. And we would
basically say, "We are not going to
finish this until the regime goes down."
And then we can do other things, which I
think are things we should do anyway,
and I'm not sure we will, and I'm not
sure the next president would, and that
is actually join the Israelis in this
maximum support maximum fracturing
campaign where ultimately the goal is to
get millions of Iranians on the streets
and we arm them and we provide them with
weapons. And we're not just arming the
Kurds in the northwest of Iran, but
we're arming
all ethnic groups and the Persians and
we're going after 20 major cities and
we're flooding in weapons and we are
ultimately going to back the Iranian
people to bring down the regime and
we're going to do it to the hilt. The
United States of America has not made
that commitment. The Israelis want to go
there, but they have certain
capabilities to do it, but they can't go
all the way without American support. So
if I'm an Iranian trying
>> isn't but isn't I I'm
I just don't understand the
the realism of this vision and again, I
understand that you're not speaking for
President Trump and this is
not what he personally wants to do, but
this is
I just want to say
that honestly, I have been somewhat
confused from the beginning
by the administration's stated
justifications for the war, which have
had the military component that you've
described, but have also sort of shifted
around, sometimes have involved regime
change, sometimes have not.
Um I don't think that there has been a
sort of certain through line in the
administration's arguments and
I'm actually in certain ways almost more
confused by your articulation
um of
your vision because it seems like in
some moments you're saying, well,
it is all going according to plan and
then another moment you're saying, well,
it's going according to plan except that
the president might
change the plan completely and make an
unwise deal.
Is there from your perspective
any kind of planning inside the
administration that is
that is close to your own views? Like
how how does how does how do you think
your vision fits together with what the
administration is actually thinks it's
doing?
Yeah, I mean Ross, maybe again, I
haven't articulated this well enough and
and shame on me, but you know, I I don't
think
>> There's there's no there's no shame in
podcasting. There's no shame in
podcasting.
>> no shame. Well,
let let let me just try to do it
slightly better job I hope of of doing
this. I mean, I I think that there I
have a vision for success. I have a
vision for significant success and I
have a vision for total success. And I
think that
my vision for success is
consistent with the administration's
articulation of their military
objectives.
All right, if we do severe damage to the
war-making capabilities of the Islamic
Republic as defined by nuclear,
missile, and military,
then I think we have succeeded.
All right, what I I would like
>> and that and that holds true even if
Trump
makes a political deal now in order to
reopen the straits and bring military
operations to an end. You would you
would say
it's a success, but it's just a limited
success. Well, it depends on the deal.
If it's a good deal that strips Iran of
its remaining war-making capabilities,
then then yes, that's a success cuz then
with through military means and
negotiations, we have stripped Iran of
its ability to wage war against the
United States and our allies. That's the
success to me. That would be a greater
success and a and a total success if we
then move to those the next stages that
we've discussed through phase two and
phase three and that we're able to do
severe damage to the repression
apparatus, open up space, and one day
there are millions of Iranians who come
to the streets, and we provided them
with the support, and they take back the
country, and we have Iran that is
peaceful and stable and not at war with
the United States and our allies. That's
total success. But I would be happy with
partial success. I would be happy with
significant success, and I would be
elated with total success. I think
President Trump is not a disciplined
speaker. He, you know, he certainly
didn't do an address to the nation,
which maybe he, you know, he should
have. He couldn't do it before, but he
should have done it after, where he
really laid out very clearly. But, I
think that he is not committed to regime
change. And even when he says, "Well,
Iranians can then take back their
country. It's a once-in-a-generation
opportunity." He He means what I
essentially have articulated, which is
over time providing support to Iranians
to come back to the streets. I think he
has defined the military objectives in a
limited way,
and I think that military is on its way
to achieving that. It has only been 3
weeks. My sense, and again, I'm I'm
I'm not being read into, you know,
briefings by by the Pentagon. I don't
know exactly I don't know exactly what
they need, but there is talk about 3
more weeks and having this thing end at,
you know, April 9th or something. And I
guess at that point, the United States
and Israel have done in their assessment
severe damage to these capabilities. If
that happens with
then a deal, and then a deal continues
to defang these capabilities,
I think that the president can then
rightly declare victory. I think the
United States can't afford to lose the
battle for Hormuz. We can We've talked
about what losing means, but that I
think the president would rightly
be able to defend as we had a 6-week
war.
We had, you know, weeks and months of
diplomacy, but at the end of the day,
I'm leaving to my successor
a severely weakened Islamic Republic
that will take years to reconstitute its
nuclear, missile, and military
capabilities, and no longer represents a
threat to the United States, our
interests, and our allies. I think that
would be
a
a good ending for for President Trump.
And it's certainly in ending that I
would consider to be a significant yet
partial success. People listening to
this conversation can tell that I find
the entire strategic approach of both
the Trump administration and people like
yourself who
support the Trump administration up to a
point but wanted to go further. I'm
confused by it, right? But I and I'm
also confused by the state of US-Israel
alignment right now. So,
does it is it a problem that there is
this sort of fundamental uncertainty or
maybe some kind of difference between
what the United States is committed to
and what its military partner is
committed to?
Does that matter?
Well, I think it could matter unless the
Americans and Israelis were not
coordinated. If they were not well
coordinated, then you could see problems
emerging. But I think they are very well
coordinated. And and I think for
President Trump, Israelis are very
useful
point of leverage against the Iranians,
right? In in any negotiation, President
Trump could essentially say,
"Like, I got this mad pitbull on a
leash.
And I can let it go. And if I let it go,
they will continue to
do what they've been doing to you. And I
will just let them do it. Or you can
negotiate with me and here my terms."
And I mean, we haven't even talked about
what the terms that the president has
laid out on us because I mean, from an
Iranian perspective, they should be
pretty reasonable terms. I mean, I don't
think they're reasonable cuz I don't
think they're enough. But the president
has laid them out. And the president has
said, "Here are my terms. No enrichment
capability. You don't need enrichment.
The only reason you've ever wanted
enrichment is to build nuclear weapons.
I'm not going to give you enrichment
capability. The HEU, give it back to
me."
He said something about missiles, which
I I wasn't clear. He was not that
articulated on it, but it was sort of
like he said they should be low-key on
missiles, quote unquote. I don't know
what that means to be
>> great great Trumpian phrase. I I also
want the world to be low-key on
missiles.
>> Yes, so low key on missiles. I I don't I
don't know what that means, but
presumably he's there's there's a
certain amount of flexibility there for
the Iranians to retain a missile
program, but but be be low key, not be
high key. And then a few other demands
about sharing Hormuz with the Ayatollah
and some other things. If that's the
list of demands, then he's looking for a
deal. But
again, you you you just said that you
don't think that's a good deal. Israel
doesn't think that's a good deal, right?
Israel has more maximalist war aims,
which is why its actions are geared more
towards regime change, right?
Is Israel a pitbull on a leash? Like is
Israel actually on the American leash?
Is it just the case that if the US says
"We're done We're done fighting Iran."
Um and then some future president Gavin
Newsom sort of becomes even more
conciliatory towards Iran that Israel
just accepts that? Well, I think under
President Trump for two and a half
years, they're very much on President
Trump's leash. Yes. Yes. Okay. Yes. I
think that absolutely. I think it as the
June war demonstrated, as soon as Trump
said 12 days, it's over and ordered
Netanyahu to order the Israeli Air Force
back to its bases, just as the Israeli
Air Force was about to drop bombs and
kill a thousand members of the Basij, of
course the Prime Minister is going to
listen to President Trump. Now, what
happens in two and a half years time
with an anti-Israel president or a
president who's more conciliatory
towards Iran, do I think they'll be on
that leash? Certainly that leash will
not be as tight and will not be as
effective. But for two and a half years,
absolutely. And from a negotiating
perspective, it really helps President
Trump to have the pitbull on the leash
to say to the Iranians, "Look, you have
a choice. You agree or I'm going to
unleash them. And by the way, I'm not
going to just unleash them, I'm going to
join them. And therefore, take your
pick. And when I join them and they're
unleashed, there is a risk that we're
going to bring down your regime."
>> Do you think Israel just takes it for
granted that this will be the last
pro-Israel president that the United
States is likely to have? No, I don't
think they take it for granted. I mean,
I I think that, you know, there's a
possibility that Marco Rubio becomes
president of the United States.
Um there's a possibility. I'm I'm not
sure. I I'm I'm not a political analyst.
Um then maybe Josh Shapiro wins the
Democratic nomination, or that a sort of
normal, like normal, president emerges
who says, "Look, we have a complicated
relationship with our Israeli ally, very
difficult ally, but not only do we
believe in their right to exist, but we
believe that they're an important
partner, and we're going to work with
them. And we have disagreements with
them on the West Bank and settlers, and
we have disagreements on this and that."
I think we can get a normal president
who
has that kind of relationship with
Israel, because, you know, we've had
those kinds of presidents from in in uh
modern American history, and I think
there's a possibility we still will. I
do think the Israelis are deeply worried
that we are going to get a president in
the White House who is hostile to them,
who either doesn't believe in their
right to exist, or believes they are
more of an adversary than an ally. Do
you think there's any risk of this being
essentially a kind of self-fulfilling
prophecy?
Because again, it just seems to me that
the world we were in a few months ago
was a world where
um Israel had achieved a lot of
political and military objectives at
some real cost in terms of public in the
United States, especially around the
Gaza war. And what's happening now is a
much It's a much bigger gamble, and if
it's perceived in the United States,
right,
as
a sort of
essentially a failed war.
Um and I think that could happen under
conditions where
sort of Trump cuts bait and makes a
deal. Could also happen, I think, under
the scenarios that you're outlining of a
longer a longer commitment with sort of
substantial economic pain.
In both of those scenarios, it it seems
to me and I will pretend I I am a
political analyst of some of some kind,
right? It seems to me that there's a
world where
Israel is already more unpopular than
it's been at any point in my lifetime in
the United States or certainly my adult
lifetime. I think it's very easy to see
a world where
the fruits of this war are a profound
American alienation from Israel and
maybe it's the end of the alliance. And
I just wanted to put that scenario to
you and get your thoughts on it.
I think you're right. I think there is
absolutely that risk. I think if the war
goes very badly, I think that yes, there
will be people on the left and right who
blame Israel.
I think incorrectly, unfairly, but that
doesn't matter cuz that'll be the
narrative because I don't think
President Trump was dragged into war
with Iran by Israel. I mean, you know,
if you if you've been listening to
Trump, he's been obsessed with the
threat from the Islamic Republic and the
feckless American response for many,
many years and he's talked about denying
Iran a nuclear weapon for many, many
years. So, the notion that
you know, Bibi Netanyahu somehow
manipulated Donald Trump to to go into
war with Iran, I think is fanciful, but
I think you're right. I think that'll be
the conspiracy theory on both the left
and the right. So, I think the Israelis
took the risk. Now,
again, isn't it isn't it possible not
that Netanyahu manipulated Trump into
war, but that
that Netanyahu, among others,
not just him,
sold Trump on the idea that regime
change could happen faster, right? Like
again, you've given me a story of, you
know, regime change happening as a
result of this war over a two-year time
horizon.
Doesn't it seem like Trump looked at
Venezuela and you know, thought, I punch
Iran hard and in six weeks there's a new
regime and maybe the Israelis were happy
to sort of flatter that delusion. Well,
I I, you know, I know there's been some
reporting in your paper about this. I
don't think the Israelis told Donald
Trump that the Iranians will be on the
streets while we're dropping bombs on
Iran and that there'll be regime change
in a few weeks. I think it's absurd to
allege that it happened because we know
that Iranians would not come to the
streets while bombs are dropping. They
didn't in June. It took them 6 months to
come to the streets and President Trump
in the first couple of days of the war,
maybe even the first day, told Iranians
to stay home
because bombs were dropping. So I I
don't think the Israelis
told them that. I think again, President
Trump has made that decision. I think he
believes that he can go to war with a
very capable partner, but I think you're
right. I think that will be the
narrative and I think it'll be very
difficult for Israel to defend against
such a narrative and I think the only
reason the Israelis decided to take that
risk is when they looked at the past
couple of years, when they looked at
October 7th, I think they decided that
leaving the Iranians with the kind of
war-making capabilities and the
possibility of developing nuclear
weapons was an existential threat to the
survival of the state of Israel and if
October 7th was not a wake-up call for
them, no one would nothing would be and
they had to within at least two to three
years while Trump was president do as
much damage to those
capabilities that the regime has to
destroy the state of Israel.
And then they would deal with the
knock-on effects of this
politically over the coming years. But
what you're saying then is that there is
this fundamental gap, I think, between
Israel's goals and the United States
because Israel in that in that
description, Israel's goal has to be
regime change at almost any cost and I
live in the United States of America. I
know what even very pro-Israel people
think in the United States of America
and that's just not that's that's not
going to be the American position. No, I
agree with you.
>> Regime change at all costs.
>> I agree with you. Of course it's not the
American position, nor should it.
It should not be the American position.
We have oceans, we're superpower, we've
got major commitments, we've got the
Chinese, the Russians, we've got capital
commitments. I mean, we've got massive
commitments that that cannot be at all
costs. I mean, I think it could be at
certain costs. I think we're week three
and American already Americans are
saying it's not worth it cuz we're at
week three and gasoline's gone up by
40%. So, it's not worth it. I don't want
to speak to that. It's a difficult
question for each individual American to
have to assess. But, I I I think
President American
I am furious that the Islamic Republic
of Iran has been killing, maiming,
torturing, kidnapping Americans since
1979 and we've done very little about
that, Ross. So, we can talk about the
little things we've done, but we've done
very little about that. And if it means
paying more gasoline and it means
putting up with an with an the
inflationary impact, and if it means
Republicans
losing the House or losing the Senate, I
mean, that's not for me up to from from
me to decide. That's for the president
to decide. That's his calculation
politically. And maybe he's made the
calculation that it is worth it. And
maybe he'll be proven right and maybe
he'll be proven wrong. But but you're
absolutely right. I mean, I think we
should be prepared to say pay some price
against an
an enemy that is an American enemy that
would have developed nuclear warhead
carrying intercontinental ballistic
missiles that threaten the American
homeland.
And with that
they would have had a stranglehold on
Hormuz not for 3 weeks, not for 6 weeks,
but effectively forever. And then we
would have been susceptible to this
regime, this nuclear armed regime that
had a stranglehold on the global
economy. I I think it was worth
preempting that and stopping that and
weakening the regime and not ever
getting into that end state. And by the
way, we spend little little time, but
not enough time talking about the fact
that there are
80% of Iranians, about 70 million
Iranians who despise this regime and
have been on the streets repeatedly for
year year after year and year after year
who've been brutalized, tortured,
killed, taken taken prisoner. Yeah. This
regime, I'll say one other thing cuz
it's worth remembering, this regime
launched chemical weapons attacks
against Iranian school girls in 2023 to
break the back of the woman life freedom
movement. So, you know, at some point
I'm not saying we we we go to war for
the Iranian people, but the Iranian
people are maybe prepared to go to war
against their own regime. Maybe the
least we can do is provide them with
material support to succeed. All right.
Let's leave it there. Mark Dubowitz,
thank you so much for joining me. Great
honor. Thanks, Ross.